JavaServices
------------

This tutorial explains how to develop JavaService classes which can be
easily embedded into a Jolie service. For the sake of clarity, here we
consider to use [Netbeans IDE](http://www.netbeans.org) as a project
management tool, but the following instructions can be easily adapted to
any kind of Java IDE.

The tutorial also presents some features of Java integration in Jolie,
i.e., manipulating Jolie values in Java, calling operations from a Java
service, and the dynamic embedding of JavaServices.

### Creation of a JavaService project

-   If you are using Maven, just click on “New Project” icon and then
    select **Maven** -&gt; **Java Application** as reported in the
    following picture.

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/createproject.png)

</div>

-   If you are creating a new project from scratch click on “New
    Project” icon and then select **Java** -&gt; **Java Class Library**

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/createproject_java.png)

</div>

Then, follows the instructions and give a name to the project (ex:
`FirstJavaService`) and define the working directory.

### Dependencies

Before continuing with the development of a JavaService keep in mind
that there is a dependency you need to add to your project in order to
properly compile the JavaService code: the jar `jolie.jar` which comes
with your jolie installation. Follow these instructions in order to
prepare the file in order to be imported into your project:

-   Locate the jolie.jar file into your system: jolie is usually
    installed into `/usr/lib/jolie` folder for linux like operative
    systems and in `C:\\Jolie` for Windows operative systems. In the
    installation folder of Jolie you can find the file jolie.jar. If you
    are not able to locate the jolie.jar file or you require some other
    jolie versions,
    [here](https://github.com/jolie/website/tree/master/www/files/releases)
    you can find the complete list of all the available releases of
    Jolie. Download the release you need.

-   If you use Maven you could register the dependency in your local
    repo by using the following command `mvn install:install-file -Dfile=<path-to-jolie.jar>/jolie.jar -DgroupId=jolie -DartifactId=jolie -Dversion=<version> -Dpackaging=jar` **NOTE** we are going to register the dependency jolie.jar into [Maven Central](https://search.maven.org), when done such a step can be skipped.

### Importing the Jolie dependency into your JavaService project

If you use Maven it is very easy to import the Jolie dependency into
your project, just add the following dependency into your pom.xml file:\

<div class="code" src="maven_jolie_dependency.txt">

</div>

If you manually manage your project just add the jolie.jar as an
external dependency. In Netbeans you have to:

-   Expand your project
-   Right mouse button on *Libraries*
-   Select *Add JAR/Folder*
-   Select the jolie.jar file from the path selector

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/addjar.png)

</div>

### The first JavaService

As a first example of a JavaService we present a sample scenario where
we suppose to extend the features of a Jolie service by exploiting
native Java computation. The architecture of the final system will look
as it is represented in the following picture:

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/firstArchitecture.png)

</div>

As it is possible to note, here the Jolie service communicate with the
JavaService with a synchronous call equivalent to a RequestResponse.

Before writing the actual code of the JavaService it is important to
create the package which will contain it. Let us name it `org.jolie.example`. Then,
let us create the new java file called `FirstJavaService.java`.

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/package.png)

</div>

#### Writing the JavaService code

Here we present the code of our first JavaService which simply print out
on the console a message received from an invoker and then reply with
the message `I am your father`.

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaService.java">

</div>

In the code there are some important aspects to be considered:

-   We need to import two classes from the jolie dependency:
    `jolie.runtime.JavaService` and `jolie.runtime.Value`
-   the class `FirstJavaService` must be extended as a JavaService:
    `... extends JavaService`
-   the request parameter and the response one are objects `Value`
-   it is possible to navigate the tree of a `Value` by using specific
    methods like `getFirstChild` (see below)
-   the request message has a subnode `message` which contains a string
-   the response message will contain the reply message in the subnode
    `reply`
-   the core logic of the JavaService is just the line
    `System.out.println("message")` which prints out the content of the
    variable message on the console

#### Building the JavaService

Now we can build the JavaService, in particular we need to create a
resulting `jar` file to be imported into the corresponding Jolie
project. In order to do this, just click with the mouse right button on
the project and select **Clean and Build**.

If you are managing the project with Maven you will find the resulting
jar in folder *target*, whereas if you are manually managing the project
you can find it in the folder *dist*.

#### Executing the JavaService

Now we are ready for embedding the JavaService into a Jolie service. It
is very simple, just follows these steps:

-   Create a folder where placing your jolie files, ex:
    `JolieJavaServiceExample`
-   Create a subfolder named `lib` (`JolieJavaServiceExample/lib`)
-   Copy the jar file of your JavaService into the folder `lib` (jolie
    automatically import all the libraries contained in the subfolder
    `lib`)
-   Create a jolie interface file where defining all the available
    operations of your JavaService and name it
    `FirstJavaServiceInterface.iol`. It is worth noting that all the
    public methods defined in the class FirstJavaService can be promoted
    as operations at the level of a Jolie service. In our example the
    interface is called `FirstJavaServiceInterface` and it declares one
    operation called `HelloWorld` (the name of the operation must be the
    same name of the corresponding operation in the JavaService). The
    request and response message types define two messages where the
    former has a subnode named `message` and the latter is named
    `reply`.\
    <div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceInterface.iol">

    </div>

-   In the code of your jolie service, create an outputPort for your
    JavaService specifically addressed for operating with it. You can
    name the outputPort as you prefer (there are no restrictions), in
    this example we use the name `FirstJavaService`. Remember to join
    the JavaService interface in the outputPort declaration as we did in
    this example:
    <div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceOutputPort.ol">

    </div>

-   Embed the JavaService by joining it with its ourputPort
    <div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceEmbedding.ol">

    </div>

-   Complete your jolie code.

Here we report a complete example of a jolie code which calls the
JavaService and prints out its response on the console. Save it in a
file named `main.ol`. Note that the embedded construct takes as a type
the keyword Java instead of Jolie because we are embedding a
JavaService. As parameter the embedded construct takes the absolute
class name obtained as *`package/name+class/name`*.

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceExample.ol">

</div>

At this point your jolie working directory should look like the
following one:

-   *your jolie working directory*
    -   **lib**
        -   FirstJavaService.jar
    -   FirstJavaServiceInterface.iol
    -   main.ol

You can run the jolie script by using the simple command
`jolie main.ol`.

**NOTE** In order to avoid the creation of folder *lib*, it is possible
to link the dependency *FirstJavaService.jar* in the command line as it
follows: `jolie -l <path-to-dependency>/FirstJavaService.jar main.ol`.
In this way you are free to place the dependency where it is more
suitable for you.

Using the JavaService into a Jolie service
------------------------------------------

In the previous example we just wrote a Jolie script which exploits the
JavaService *FirstJavaService*. Clearly, it is possible to exploit the
same JavaService within a Jolie service by adding an inputPort to the
previous script.

<div class="doc_image">

\
![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/firstArchitectureService.png)\

</div>

In the following case we present a possible solution where the operation
of the JavaService is exported to the inputPort by exploiting the same
interface `FirstJavaServiceInterface` with a new implementation of the
operation `HelloWorld` in the main scope of the service.

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceExampleService.ol">

</div>

Such a scenario is useful when we need to add some extra computation
within the behaviour before invoking the JavaService (in the example we
print out the request message before forwarding it to the JavaService).
In those cases where there is no need to manipulate the messages in the
behaviour, we could directly aggregate the JavaService outputPort in the
inputPort of the service by obtaining a direct connection between the
Jolie inputPort and the JavaService.

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceExampleAggregation.ol">

</div>

Manipulating Jolie values in Java
---------------------------------

In this section we deepen the usage of the class `Value` which allows
for the management of Jolie value trees within Java.

#### Creating a value.

First of all, we need to create a Value in Java as we would do in Jolie.
The following Java code creates a Value named `v`.

<div class="code" src="CreateValue.java">

</div>

#### Getting the vector elements.

In each Jolie tree, a node is a vector. In order to access/get the
vector elements of a node, you can use the method
`getChildren( String subnodeName )` which returns the corresponding
`ValueVector` of the subnode `subnondeName`. In the following example we
get all the vector elements of the subnode `subnode1`.

<div class="code" src="ValueVector.java">

</div>

All the items of a ValueVector are Value objects. In order to access the
Value element at index *i* it is possible to use the method
`get( int index )`. In the following example we access the third element
of the subnode `subnode1` where 0 is the index of the first element.

<div class="code" src="ValueVectorElement.java">

</div>

#### Setting the value of an element.

It is possible to use the method `setValue( ... )` for setting the value
content of an element as in the following example:

<div class="code" src="ValueVectorElementSet.java">

</div>

#### Getting the value of an element.

Once accessed a vector element (a value in general), it is possible to
get its value by simply using one of the following methods depending on the type
of the content:

-   `strValue()`
-   `intValue()`
-   `longValue()`
-   `boolValue()`
-   `doubleValue()`
-   `byteArrayValue()`.

In the following example we suppose to print out the content of the
third element of the subnode `subnode1` supposing it is a string.\

<div class="code" src="ValueVectorElementPrint.java">

</div>

Calling an operation of the embedder from the JavaService
---------------------------------------------------------

A JavaService can be also programmed to call an operation of the
embedder. A typical example of such a scenario is the case of a callback
pattern between the embedder and the JavaService as reported in the
picture below:

<div class="doc_image">

![](documentation/architectural_composition/img/firstArchitectureServiceCallback.png)

</div>

This can be done with the method `sendMessage` of the class
`JavaService`. As an example, we extend the previous JavaService by
introducing a new asynchronous method called `AsynchHelloWorld` which
receives a request with the same message of method `HelloWorld` and a
field `sleep` which specifies the number of millisecond to wait before
sending the reply. When Such a time-out has been introduced just for
simulating a delay in the response. When the sleeping time is finished
the method calls back the Jolie service on its operation `reply`.\

<div class="code" src="JavaServiceCallback.java">

</div>

The class `CommMessage` (package `Jolie.net`) represents a Jolie
communication message which is sent to the embedder by means of the
JavaService method `sendMessage`. The method indeed requires a message
which is created by exploiting the static methods `createRequest`. In
this case, the message has been initialized with the following
parameters:

-   `reply`: the name of the operation of the embedder to call;
-   `/`: the service path (see
    [Redirection](architectural_composition/redirection.html));
-   `response` : a Value object that contains the data structure to
    send.

In this case, the message to send contains the same string of method
`"HelloWorld`. It is worth noting that in this example the operation
*reply* is a **OneWay** operation but it is possible also to interact by
using a *RequestResponse* operation. The class `CommMessage` provides
different static methods for creating a request message and a response
message. Now let us comment how the *FirstJavaServiceInterface* must be
modified in order to be compliant with the new JavaService:

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceInterfaceNew.iol">

</div>

The new operation `AsyncHelloWorld` has been declared as a OneWay
operation and its message type contains two subnodes: `message` and
`sleep`. Note that in this case, the corresponding Java method
`AsyncHelloWorld` returns a `void` instead of a `Value`.

The embedder follows:

<div class="code" src="JavaServiceCallbackEmbedder.ol">

</div>

The embedder must declare its own *inputPort* (here called
`MyLocalPort`) where it will receive messages from the JavaService. In
particular, on port *MyLocalPort*, the embedder exhibits a OneWay
operation called `reply`. In the main scope, the embedder calls the
JavaService by means of the operation `AsyncHelloWorld` and then waits for the reply message on the operation `reply`.

Annotations
-----------

Each public method programmed within a JavaService must be considered as
an input operation that can be invoked from the embedder. Depending on
the return object the method represents a OneWay operation or a
RequestResponse one. If the return type is `void`, the operation is
considered a OneWay operation, a RequestResponse operation otherwise.
You can override this behaviour by using the `@RequestResponse` annotation, which forces Jolie to consider the annotated method as a RequestResponse operation.

Using RequestResponse operations in JavaServices
------------------------------------------------

So far, we have exploited only OneWay operations for making interactions
between the JavaService and the embedder. Now, we present how to exploit
also RequestResponse operations. In the example below there are both a
RequestResponse invocation from the JavaService to the embedder and a
RequestResponse invocation from the embedder to the JavaService. The
Java code follows:

<div class="code" src="java_services_1.java">

</div>

In this example, the JavaService exhibits a OneWay operation `start`
where it prints out the received message and then invokes the embedder
by means of the RequestResponse operation `initialize`. The
RequestResponse invocation is performed by means of the method
`sendMessage` where the string `"Hello world from the JavaService"` is
the message content. Since, we are calling a RequestResponse we must
synchronously wait for receiving the response message by means of the
methods `recvResponseFor` which returns the response message stored into
the variable `response`.

Faults
------

Faults are very important for defining a correct communication protocol
between a JavaService and a Jolie service. Here we explain how managing
both faults from the JavaService to the embedder Jolie service and
vice-versa.

### Sending a Fault from a Javaservice

Let us consider the *FirstJavaService* example where we call the method
`HelloWorld` of the JavaService. In particular, let us modify the Java
code in order to reply with a fault in case the incoming message is
wrong.

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceWithFault.java">

</div>

Note that the method `HelloWorld` throws an exception called
`FaultException` that comes from the *jolie.runtime* package. A simple
Java exception **is not** recognized by the Jolie interpreter as a
Fault, only those of FaultException type are. The creation of a
*FaultException* is very simple, the constructor can take one or two
parameters. The former one is always the name of the fault, whereas the
latter one, if present, contains the fault value tree (in the example a
message with a subnode `msg`). The fault value tree is a common object
of type *Value*. On the jolie service side, there is nothing special but
the fault is managed as usual:\

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceWithFault.ol">

</div>

\
Keep in mind to modify the *FirstJavaServiceInterface* by declaring the
fault `WrongFault` for the operation `HelloWorld`:\

<div class="code" src="FirstJavaServiceWithFaultFaultDeclaration.ol">

</div>

### Managing fault responses

In Jolie a RequestResponse message can return a fault message which must
be managed into the JavaService. Such a task is very easy and can be
achieved by checking if the response is a fault or not by exploiting
method `isFault` of the class `CommMessage` as reported in the following
code snippet:

<div class="code" src="java_services_3.java">

</div>

JavaService dynamic embedding
-----------------------------

So far, we have discussed the possibility to statically embed a
JavaService. In this case the JavaService is shared among all the
sessions created by the embedder. In some cases, it could be particularly
suitable to embed an instance of JavaService for each running session of
the embedder. Such a task can be fulfilled by exploiting dynamic
embedding functionality supplied by the `Runtime` of Jolie. In the
following example we present the Java code of a JavaService which simply
returns the value of a counter that is increased each time it is invoked
on its method `start`.

<div class="code" src="java_services_2.java">

</div>

In the following code we report a classical embedding of this
JavaService:

<div class="code" src="DynamicJavaServiceClassic.ol">

</div>

if we run a client that calls the service ten times as in the following
code snippet:

<div class="code" src="DynamicJavaServiceClassicClient.ol">

</div>

we obtain:

    Received counter 1
    Received counter 2
    Received counter 3
    Received counter 4
    Received counter 5
    Received counter 6
    Received counter 7
    Received counter 8
    Received counter 9
    Received counter 10

In this case the JavaService is shared among all the sessions and each
new invocation will increase its inner counter.

Now let us see what happens if we dynamically embed it as reported in
the following service:

<div class="code" src="DynamicJavaServiceDynamicEmbedding.ol">

</div>

Note that we included `runtime.iol` in order to exploit
`loadEmbeddedService@Runtime` operation. Such an operation permits to
dynamically embed the JavaService in the context of the running session.
The operation returns the memory location which is directly bound in the
location `DynamicJavaService.location` that is the location of
outputPort `DynamicJavaService`.

Now, if we run the same client as in the example before, we obtain the
following result:

    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1
    Received counter 1

Such a result means that for each session enabled on the embedder, a new
JavaService object is instantiated and executed, thus the counter will
start from zero every invocation.
